---
layout: post
title:  "Things I Have Read Online That You Can Only Read Online Which You Should Read Online"
date:   2048-01-01 00:00:00
---

Stories. DONE = have a first draft.
Worm (DONE)
Pact (DONE)
Twig (DONE)
Fallout Equestria (DONE)
Ra (DONE)
Fine Structure (DONE)
HPMoR (DONE)
MLP Loops (DONE kinda, need to move and rename)
Natural 20 (DONE but merge it)
Eternal (DONE)
Background Pony (DONE)
My Little Dashie (DONE)
Past Sins (DONE)
Hard Reset Trilogy (DONE)
Cenotaph
Wake
Friendship is Optimal (DONE)
Artemis, Stella, Beat (DONE)
A Taste Of the Good Life (DONE)


So! Why am I making this post? Well, I've noticed that I've read a lot more web
only content than the average, which is probably because I both have no social
life and either become bored or obsessed with fandoms, with very little middle
ground. The vast majority of stories I've read over the past few years are
ones published online; there's something very addicting about a story that I can
read anywhere I have internet. (Which is anywhere at all because I have a smartphone.)
This means I've probably missed out on some very good books that came out recently,
but it also means I'm actually vaquely qualified to recommend stories to people.
Hooray! Let's get to it.

Stories are organized by fandom, then quality, then author. Within each subcategory,
grouping works by author takes priority over ordering by quality.

Stories labeled with a ** are good enough that I recommend them even if you are
unfamiliar with the source material.

For space, I've unfortunately had to leave off webcomics. There are some that I
really want to gush about (read Gunnerkrigg Court NOW) but this is already
getting unwieldy.


GENERAL (stories with no pre-requisite knowledge):

Worm, by Wildbow
https://parahumans.wordpress.com/about/

Worm is within my top 3 stories I've ever read. It's so, so excellent. Honestly,
the about page linked above is a better summary than I can give, but I'll try.

The premise of Worm is that it's a world where superpowers are real. That's the
only difference. Otherwise, everything is played as realistically as possible.
Characters use their powers with as much ingenuity and cleverness as they can manage,
injuries don't magically go away from chapter to chapter, and pointing out why the
world is wrong doesn't make turning it right any easier. For that matter, whether
something is right or wrong in the first place depends heavily on context and
which character is making that decision.

As stories go, it's pretty dark, but the action is gripping and the actions of
all the characters flow organically from their characterization. I'm still surprised at
how often I got scared that a character would die. (And characters do die. A lot.)

In my opinion, the last third of chapters aren't as great, but they're still solid, and until
then it's a great page turner. (Or is it mouse clicker when you're on the internet?)

The story is looooooooong, but definitely worth it.

Pact, by Wildbow
https://pactwebserial.wordpress.com/about/

The second web serial written by wildbow, also completed. Although I enjoyed Pact,
it's definitely not as good.

If Worm is a modernized superhero story, then Pact is a modernized
supernatural story. Unlike Worm, which attempts to give an explanation for
how different powers work, Pact is deliberately vague in how different monsters
act and how the magic system actually works. It's also very dark, darker than Worm.
When you read the story, you get a sense of isolation for many of the chapters,
and that can be emotionally draining.

Starts out strong, meanders a lot towards its middle, then has some absolutely
fantastic final arcs. Much shorter than Worm, but still pretty lengthy. Still reccomend
reading Worm first.

Twig, by Wildbow
https://twigserial.wordpress.com/about/

The third serial by Wildbow, in progress. I'm not caught up on it, I'm currently
around 10 chapters behind present day (at the start of Arc 3). Updated 2-3 times a week.

So far I've enjoyed Twig, but I haven't read enough to have a strong opinion on it.
Setting is biopunk, characters are fun. Still don't know what the big picture is
like, but there's been some interesting details revealed.


Ra, by qntm
http://qntm.org/ra

Magic is real.

Magic is also a science. People like to think they can pick up a wand, say "Fireball!"
and fire will spout out from their wand and go towards the person they're pointing it at,
as if the creation of thermal and kinetic energy is that simple.
That's not how magic works. Not here.

It took a while for me to get into Ra, but once I did I got hooked. I'd say
I liked it for sure around either "Magic Isn't" or "The Jesus Machine". "The Jesus Machine"
is actually a decent short story on its own, although I still recommend starting
from the beginning.

There's some wonderfully dry humor, and it's very engaging to see the rules of magic slowly
get unravelled. This is by far the nerdiest story of the bunch.
It's hard science fiction, and you should be prepared to look up a few things while
you're reading. This is a story where magic has been proven to have generally-unsolvable
fluid dynamics equations. It's also a story where a character says "Fuck the natural
logirithm!" when talking about the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation, and where someone mentions
Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem in a relevant context. Computer science puns abound
everywhere you look (and a few places you don't), and I'm sure I've missed a couple
things that went over my head.

By the author's own admission, the story changes in scope and tone when the inner
workings of magic finally get revealed. Until then, it's fantastic. After that point,
your mileage may vary, but I still enjoyed it.

Fine Structure, by qntm
http://qntm.org/structure

Fine Structure is a weird story to talk about. The more you think about it, the better
it becomes, and the height of my addiction was in my second readthrough of the story,
not the first.

The core drive of Fine Structure is similar to Ra. The world acts in strange
ways, and you're reading to get explanations of why things are happening the way
they are. These details are revealed in multiple short stories that are both
running in parallel and told out of order. They eventually converge and form one
coherent narrative, but it's a wild journey to get there.

Without spoiling too much, the main storylines are:

- Every year, someone on Earth is struck by lightning and gains superpowers.
Each year's power is twice as strong as the last. This has been happening for 10 years.
- When working on a new form of communications technology, a research group gets
a signal of 60 trillion binary digits. It starts with the primes from
2 to 127, then starts defining mathematical notation. Then things get complicated.
- One day, a man wakes up with the power to walk through solid objects. It comes
naturally to him, as though he knew how to do it all his life, but he has no memory
of ever using it before.

The characters in Fine Structure aren't that amazing - often, characters act as
ways for the author to express ideas about how the world works, instead of as
characters with personality and agency. However, the ideas are interesting enough
to overshadow this.

If you read Fine Structure, I would recommend not reading the comments until you've
finished the story. Some readers are exceptionally bright and figure out answers
to the story's riddles the chapter they come out, and it's more fun to see how much
you can figure out on your own and let the story reveal itself.

Other stories, by qntm
http://qntm.org/fiction

Sam Hughes has a lot of science fiction short stories on his site, and I like
most of them. He also has some blog posts about different models of time travel
and time in general that are worth reading, under qntm.org/time.

Recommended short stories:
- I don't know, Timmy, being God is a big responsibility
- The Difference
- The Last-But-One Question
- Causal Noose
- Gorge


CROSSOVER (stories based in two or more fandoms. I'll remark on how much I think you need, but usually you only need one of the two to enjoy these stories)

**Fallout Equestria, by kkat (MLP x Fallout)
http://www.fimfiction.net/story/119190/fallout-equestria

Yes, someone did a crossover between cartoon ponies and a post-apocalyptic wasteland.
AND IT'S REALLY GOOD! I know, right? How does that even make sense?

Fallout Equestria bears many similarities to Worm. Littlepip is Taylor, and Taylor
is Littlepip; the number of parallels between the two stories is ridiculous. Both
stories are dark, involve clever use of unconventional talents, and have running themes
of companionship and unintended consequences. Head to head, I actually like Fallout
Equestria over Worm, and I love Worm so, so much. Let's put it this way: the author
made a pool of water one of the scariest encounters of the story.

The first couple of chapters can be tricky to get through - they're gory and graphic,
and they're intended to be that way to emphasize the reaction of the protagonist, but
it also turns some people off the story. Persevere and you'll get to the good stuff.

Good enough to read if you know nothing about MLP or Fallout, but for maximal enjoyment
and emotional heft, know Friendship is Magic up to the middle of Season 2.

**Doctor Whooves Adventures, by Squeak and the Pony in a Box crew (MLP x Doctor Who)
https://ponyinabox.com/shows/doctor-whooves

I'm bending my rules a bit for this one. It's not a written story, it's an audio
play. Honestly, it's hard for me to find something about this show I don't like.
Twilight's a fantastic companion; she's one of the few characters that can keep
up with The Doctor, and gets herself out of trouble almost as often as the Doctor
does. The voice actors are great, the scripts are fantastic, even the art style
for the accompanying pictures are good. The only thing I'm sad about is the update
rate. Speaking of which, Bells of Fate part 2 is coming out in August! OMG OMG
it's been a YEAR since the first part came out and it's finally happening it's
happening.

Ahem. Yes, I like this series a lot. This series singlehandedly brought Doctor
Who from "may watch sometime" to "will watch when I have time" and got me into
Celtic music (Bells of Fate is themed after a cross between Ireland and the Knights
of Camelot.) There's a little continuity, but most episodes
are standalone. Recommended viewing order:

Number 12 Part 1 + 2 (character introduction)
Bells of Fate (yeah I've gushed about this enough)
Rhapsody in Blue Box (requires a little continuity, watch Cell Mates first. SO WORTH IT though, around as good as Bells of Fate)
Wrong Way Backwards Parts 1 + 2 + 3 + 1 + 2 + 3 (you'll see what I mean. It's very elaborately made.)
Shadows of the Lunar Republic
Chords of Chaos + Pony of the Opera

Harry Potter and the Natural 20 (Harry Potter x D&D)
https://www.fanfiction.net/s/8096183/1/Harry-Potter-and-the-Natural-20

If you know either Harry Potter or D&D, you'll like this story. The premise is that
a min-maxing Wizard named Milo from the D&D universe is dropped into the Harry Potter
universe. Their systems of magic collide, and hilarity ensues. If you want to see
creative rule-bending, this is a story for you. If you want to see someone
freak out about a Save-or-Die spell with an impossibly high DC check, this is
also for you.

Note that whenever Milo needs to roll a dice, the author actually rolls a dice
in real life, then continues writing based on the result. Milo also has an online
character sheet that gets updated over the story. Unfortunately, the story
is on indefinite hiatus right now.

The Infinite Loops (everything x everything)
http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/FanFic/TheInfiniteLoops

The Infinite Loops is this strange set of community driven short stories. The
excuse premise is as follows:

- There is a massive multiversal supercomputer called Yggdrasil, which runs
all fictional realities.
- Something is very, very broken in Yggdrasil. As a stopgap measure, the admins
of Yggdrasil have put realities into a safe mode where no new history can happen -
when a universe hits the end of its history (end of current canon), it loops back
to the start of canon.
- The protagonists of some universes are Awake, which means they keep memories
when the loop happens. Those characters are stuck in a Groundhog Day scenario
where time keeps repeating. Secondary characters may or may not be awake in a given
loop.
- Skills carry over between loops, knowledge carries over between loops.
Loopers have a soulbonded extra-dimensional pocket that lets them carry objects
between loops. Pockets start small but grow over time. One of the oldest loopers
has a very nice Death Star collection.
- Different universes can cross over, and characters can start a time loop
in another universe. This is where the stories get fun. You can have a looping
Jean-Luc Picard wake in Lord of the Rings, meet up with a looping Bilbo Baggins,
and together they can troll the hell out of an unawake Gandalf. Or, Mega Man
could loop into the How to Train your Dragon universe, trade tips with Hiccup, and
then bring his dragon riding skills back to the Mega Man universe. Or, someone
may decide to take a break from all the hijinks, and have time looping Anakin
+ time looping Obi-Wan sit down and have a long, emotional discussion about
why things between them ended up so badly the first time through.

Overall, it creates a strangely addictive anthology. The time loop framework
is a good foundation for people to try writing crazy crossovers. Bourne Identity x MLP? It
exists. Naruto x Kung Fu Panda? Yep, someone wrote a story based on a shared
love for ramen. Star Trek x World War 2? Yes, crossovers with real history
are allowed too.

I was introduced through the MLP loops. To read those, you should go in
with knowledge up to season 3, or accept that you'll get spoiled. I can't speak
to the quality of the other anthologies. See the crazy big spreadsheet
at https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1aMlKMJktaql_1dwZ3ksPwFx-_zbuEOxkdy5gPcHkN0w/edit#gid=0
for your own intro point.

Harry Potter and the Natural 20 (LINK) (D&D x Harry Potter)

A munchkin D&D wizard named Milo drops into the
Harry Potter universe. Hilarity ensues. The beginning is comedy as Milo
tries to reconcile his D&D magic with Harry Potter magic and uses metagaming
to predict which characters will be important. Over time, the story turns
dramatic. There's real character development, and both heroes and villains
adapt their plots on the fly without seeming unrealistically intelligent.
Highly recommended reading. You only need to know one of D&D or Harry Potter
to enjoy this, but it'll be better if you have a passing understanding of both.

HARRY POTTER

Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality
http://hpmor.com/

One of the most infamous works out there. This tends to be love it or hate it,
I'm in the love it camp but entirely understand why people don't like it.

Premise: Petunia Dursley leaves Vernon and marries an Oxford professor. Harry
grows up in a loving household surrounded by books, and spends most of his
childhood reading books about science, meaning physics + chemistry + cognitive
science. Then, he gets a letter from Hogwarts...

The story is pretty pedagogical, since one of the author's main goals is to
bring more awareness to cognitive biases. This is one of the big sticking points.
The pedagogy can get in the way of the writing, which is fine if you're okay
with taking a break to learn about testing the null hypothesis, and annoying
if you're not in the mood. However, that doesn't mean the plot
is bad. There are very funny, very awesome moments. Characters are well
developed and act intelligently - one of the core tenets is that every character
must believe themselves to be correct and justified, even if they are villanous.

MY LITTLE PONY: FRIENDSHIP IS MAGIC

Each story here is labeled with how much of the show it'll spoil you on. (Usually,
you get spoiled up to whenever the fanfic was written.)

Hard Reset, by Eakin (LINK) (Spoilers through end of Season 2)

Twilight Sparkle is having a bad day. First, an experimental spell blows up in her
face and gets her stuck in a time loop. Second, an alien invasion is coming to
destroy the city. She's going to stop the invasion, even if it kills here.
Which it will. A lot.

If you've seen Edge of Tomorrow, this is basically a pony version of Edge of Tomorrow
(except this story was written around a year before Edge of Tomorrow came out.)
If you liked Edge of Tomorrow, you'll like this story. If you haven't, then
you'll probably still like this story. There's plenty of action and loads of
black comedy, but Eakin also explores the darker side of getting stuck in a time
loop where you have to watch people die all the time.
The final chapter is very well done and is one of my favorite endings of all time.

It's a dark adventure. It's followed by two sequels, A Stitch In Time and You
Can Fight Fate. Stitch is a lighter romantic comedy + adventure and Fate is more
like Hard Reset in tone. I recommend both after finishing Hard Reset,
but You Can Fight Fate is a definite step down in quality. Stitch is around as good,
but it's also a different genre.


**Friendship is Optimal, by ___ (LINK) (No spoilers, accessible to anyone)

This isn't exactly an MLP story, although knowing MLP might inform things a bit.
In real life, Hasbro contacts a studio (check) to make an MMO for Friendship is
Magic. Said studio is most well known for their game which procedurally generated
enemies and encounters through an AI system developed in house. The lead
programmer sees this as the best chance for creating a friendly strong AI, and
thus CelestAI is born...

This story may actually be better if you are ambivalent or slightly antagonistic
towards MLP. It's written by someone who has read best predictions for how a
strong self-improving AI will act, and it shows. I will say that the story doesn't
have a protagonist. The closest protagonist is the AI, but we're deliberately
not allowed to see from the AI's point of view, and can only see how various
humans act against what the AI does. I still recommend reading it, because part
of the fun (or horror depending on your perspective) is seeing how Equestria
Online plays out, and realizing that you wouldn't act much differently if it
happened for real.

I actually recommend the fan-fanfic "The Law Offices of Artemis, Stella, and Beat"
over Friendship is Optimal, but you do need the first 2/3rd of Friendship is
Optimal for background. Artemis, Stella, and Beat has much more human-to-human
interactions that make it more engaging to read.


A Taste of The Good Life, by Eakin (LINK) (Very light spoilers up through Season 2, but pretty accessible)

When a restaurant burns down and the insurance company refuses to pay out,
its owner is stuck with no restaurant for the next few months. He comes up
with a plan: he'll go to Ponyville, buy a rundown property, flip it into
a restaurant, run it for a few months, then sell it to someone once his original
restaurant is rebuilt. He may have gotten more than he bargained for...

It's a cute story! It's a slice of life and stays light throughout. The plot is
predictable from a mile away, but that doesn't matter because the execution is
well done. As with Hard Reset, Eakin gets a lot of mileage out of short, simple
sentences, so it's very readable. That's all there is to it. Go, read!

Past Sins, by ____ (LINK) (Spoilers through Season 1. Sequel side stories spoil through Season 2)

A cult tries to revive Nightmare Moon, but the ritual goes awry. It produces
a black alicorn filly named Nyx, who Twilight quickly adopts when she realizes
Nyx has no memories and no home. Twilight can see past the signs that she's
related to Nightmare Moon, but it's not clear the world will be as forgiving.

So, here's the thing. This is a historically important fanfic. It was one of the
first ones to achieve widespread popularity in the fandom. It's still enjoyable
to read, but it has aged a bit. Its premise leads to lots of angst, which can
often fall flat. I enjoyed the side stories more than the original fanfic since they
feel more compact, but again the original story is required to read the side stories.

Eternal, by device.heretic (LINK) (Spoilers through Season 2)

Set in an AU where nothing after Season 2 happened. It's several years after the
events of the show. Ponyville has grown into a city, Twilight has reached Arch-Mage,
and she's Celestia's personal liason between Ponyville and Canterlot. This came at
the cost of their relationship, which has turned from a personal relationship
to a business one. The story explores the Sun and her Faithful Student, and what
those titles actually mean.

It's weird for me to recommend this story. The first half of the story is slow and
takes forever to set up the main conflict. The writing style is very purpley, and wavers
between incredibly vague and annoyingly in depth. It fails Show, Don't Tell a lot,
and often we're told what the characters are feeling instead of seeing it in their
actions.

...And despite all this, I did really enjoy this story. The last five chapters
genuinuely got to me. The writing gets better, the pacing issues are fixed, and
there's real emotional heft. The problem is that there's a lot of mediocre content
to get through before you hit the good stuff.

My Little Dashie, by ___ (LINK) (Spoilers through Season 2 opening)

It's...okay. So, this story is also historically significant to the fandom, and
was also super popular at the time, with an infamous ability to make people sad.
It's a self insert written
in first person, except the self insert is deliberately bland to invite yourself
to insert yourself into the story. That didn't work for me. It's a one-shot, so
it's pretty short, and its length wasn't enough time to get me invested.
It's only around 12,000 words (length of a long NYT article), so I'd
still recommend reading it to understand the references made everywhere...then
watch the parody of it here (LINK).

Background Pony, by ___ (LINK) (Spoilers through Season 2 opening)

Read the summary from the link above, it's better than what I can do.

This is an anti-recommendation. Read the first chapter and skip the rest. The prose
is very flowery, it like to talk about philosophy and say things that fit the
pattern of wise sayings without actually saying anything. It's genuinely sad, and sometimes
cute, and the strength of the first chapter drove me to read more. Unfortunately,
a lot of later chapters take a long time to get anywhere. I kept reading to see the conclusion
of the overarching storyline, but the ending was incredibly disappointing to me since
it went against everything I thought the main character (or background pony as it were)
stood for.

This is one of the few stories where I actually felt like I wasted my time after
I finished it. Which is a real shame, because there are a few chapters in the middle
that I consider excellent. Unfortunately, I can't justify the amount you need
to read through to get there, so stop early before the fanfic gets bad.

WORM

Yes, I realize that Worm fanfic caters to a small community. These require reading
all of Worm beforehand, which already limits a lot of people.

Cenotaph, by ___ (LINK)

Cenotaph is consistently as good as the best chapters of Worm.

It's utterly fanstastic.
